# Setup

### Software prerequisites

#### Python

If using easy_train.py then at least 3.7 is required.

Otherwise versions around 3.6 should also work, but updating is recommended.

Python 3.11 was also tested and works well.

#### A C++ compiler

If you're using easy_train.py then at least GCC 9.2 is required for compiling the data loader, Stockfish, and c-chess-cli. This a defensive version requirement as older versions were known to cause problems with Stockfish.

If you're not using easy_train.py then no automatic compilation will take place; use what you wish.

If you're on Windows the best way is to probably use [MSYS2](https://www.msys2.org/). It would also make it easy to install Make (next step).

#### Make

For compiling Stockfish and c-chess-cli. Not strictly necessary if you're not using easy_train.py, but recommended.

#### CMake

Necessary for compiling the data loader.

https://cmake.org/install/

### Package dependencies

```
python -m venv trainer
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

PyTorch with CUDA 11.8 will be automatically installed, along with the matching CuPy version.

### The data loader (if not using easy_train.py)

This requires a C++17 compiler and cmake.

Windows:
```
compile_data_loader.bat
```

Linux/Mac:
```
sh compile_data_loader.bat
```

# Train a network

```
source env/bin/activate
python train.py --gpus 1 train_data.bin val_data.bin
```

## Resuming from a checkpoint
```
python train.py --gpus 1 --resume_from_checkpoint <path> ...
```

## Feature set selection
By default the trainer uses a factorized HalfKAv2_hm feature set (named "HalfKAv2_hm^")
If you wish to change the feature set used then you can use the `--features=NAME` option. For the list of available features see `--help`
The default is:
```
python train.py ... --features="HalfKAv2_hm^"
```

## Skipping certain fens in the training

`--smart-fen-skipping` currently skips over moves where the king is in check, or where the bestMove is a capture (typical of non-quiet positions).
`--random-fen-skipping N` skip N fens on average before using one. Uses fewer fens per game, useful with large data sets.

## Current recommended training invocation

```
python train.py --smart-fen-skipping --random-fen-skipping 3 --batch-size 16384 --threads 2 --num-workers 2 --gpus 1 trainingdata validationdata
```
best nets have been trained with 16B d9-scored nets, training runs >200 epochs



# Export a network

Using either a checkpoint (`.ckpt`) or serialized model (`.pt`),
you can export to SF NNUE format.  This will convert `last.ckpt`
to `nn.nnue`, which you can load directly in SF.
```
python serialize.py last.ckpt nn.nnue
```

# Import a network

Import an existing SF NNUE network to the pytorch network format.
```
python serialize.py nn.nnue converted.pt
```

# Visualize a network

Visualize a network from either a checkpoint (`.ckpt`), a serialized model (`.pt`)
or a SF NNUE file (`.nnue`).
```
python visualize.py nn.nnue --features="HalfKAv2_hm"
```

Visualize the difference between two networks from either a checkpoint (`.ckpt`), a serialized model (`.pt`)
or a SF NNUE file (`.nnue`).
```
python visualize.py nn.nnue  --features="HalfKAv2_hm" --ref-model nn.cpkt --ref-features="HalfKAv2_hm^"
```

# Logging

```
pip install tensorboard
tensorboard --logdir=logs
```
Then, go to http://localhost:6006/

# Automatically run matches to determine the best net generated by a (running) training

```
python run_games.py --concurrency 16 --stockfish_exe ./stockfish.master --c_chess_exe ./c-chess-cli --ordo_exe ./ordo --book_file_name ./noob_3moves.epd run96
```

Automatically converts all `.ckpt` found under `run96` to `.nnue` and runs games to find the best net. Games are played using `c-chess-cli` and nets are ranked using `ordo`.
This script runs in a loop, and will monitor the directory for new checkpoints. Can be run in parallel with the training, if idle cores are available.


# Thanks

* Sopel - for the amazing fast sparse data loader
* connormcmonigle - https://github.com/connormcmonigle/seer-nnue, and loss function advice.
* syzygy - http://www.talkchess.com/forum3/viewtopic.php?f=7&t=75506
* https://github.com/DanielUranga/TensorFlowNNUE
* https://hxim.github.io/Stockfish-Evaluation-Guide/
* dkappe - Suggesting ranger (https://github.com/lessw2020/Ranger-Deep-Learning-Optimizer)